[title=ECL - introduction]
# The ECL tutorial

ECL (Enemy Control Language) is the scripting language used by the Windows Touhou games (as well as Seihou games - in fact, it was originally made by PBG for the first Seihou game). As the name suggests, it's used to control how enemies move, patterns they shoot etc. It has significantly changed since EoSD, with the largest overhaul being in MoF. The ECL scripts themselves are compiled - fortunately, the [Touhou Toolkit](https://github.com/thpatch/thtk) has **thecl**, which can "decompile" and compile them, making editing possible.  
  
This tutorial is going to focus on the ECL used by games from TD to the most recent one. WBaWC will be used for all examples and such things, so make sure you have it. While most things would also apply to games from MoF to GFW, the instruction numbers are completely different there. That being said, before actually moving on to editing the scripts, it's important to setup a small dev environment in order to be able to quickly test changes. The next page covers just that - use the navigation below to go to it.  
  
thecl will be the ECL compiler/decompiler used for this tutorial. You might be thinking now, "are there other ones?" - and well, there is [MUAECL2](https://github.com/Shedarshian/MUAECL2), but it doesn't have dumping functionality and is only intended to be used with modified Touhou 15 or the "MUAECL engine" (I don't know what that is).  
  
If you have any questions or ideas of what could be improved in the tutorial, feel free to join the [ZUNcode discord](https://discord.gg/fvPJvHJ)!  
  
Note: this tutorial is still very WIP, many things will most likely change.

Table of contents:
### Chapter 1 - the basics
- 1.0. [Setting up the enviroment](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=2)  
- 1.1. [Instructions and Subroutines](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=3)  
- 1.2. [Basic enemy spawning](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=4)  
- 1.3. [Bullet managers, shooting danmaku](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=5)  
- 1.4. [Variables](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=6)  
- 1.5. [Expressions, return types](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=7)  
- 1.6. [The stack](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=8)  
- 1.7. [Conditional statements](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=9)  
- 1.8. [Loops](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=10)  
- 1.9. [Enemy positioning](#b=ecl-tutorial/&p=11)  
- 1.A Creating simple patterns (TODO)  
- 1.B Creating a simple stage part (TODO) 

### Chapter 2 - going a bit deeper
- 2.0 The cursed `var` keyword and an unusual `if` statement (TODO)
- 2.1 The concept of time and jumps (yes this will unironically be the title)  
- 2.? I've yet to decide what will be done later...