[title=ECL - enemy positioning]

[requireEclmap=17]

## Enemy positioning
Enemy positions in ECL may seem a bit unintuitive at first, but the way they are designed actually simplifies a lot of things. The coordinate system itself is unusual as well:  
[img=content/ecl-tutorial/files/10/grid.png]  
As you can see, the X coordinates go from `-192` to `192`, and the Y coordinates from `0` to `448`. This makes coordinates `(0,0)` top-middle of the screen, instead of top-left as most people would expect. It makes things easier though, since if you want to do something symetrically, you just use `(x, y)` and `(-x, y)` instead of subtracting `x` from some constant for the second pair of coordinates. There is a bit more to it though, since enemies actually use *2 pairs* of coordinates.

### Absolute and relative positions
Every enemy has 2 sets of coordinates: the *absolute* position and the *relative* position. When added together, they give the *final* position. The names of these positions actually have nothing to do with the enemy spawning instruction used ([ins=300,17] vs [ins=301,17]). When you spawn an enemy, its relative position is always set to `(0, 0)`, and the absolute position is set to the coordinates where you wanted to create it. This results in the *final* position, which is the position where the enemy is actually displayed on the screen, shoots bullets from etc., being exactly where you spawned the enemy (as expected). From there, the enemy can use various instructions to modify its absolute and relative positions in order to move around the screen.  

### What is the purpose of having two positions?
Well, the name *position* is a bit misleading here - apart from coordinates, every enemy has both absolute and relative movement speeds, angles, etc.. Let's say we want an enemy to move left at speed `2.0f`, and also move down at speed of `1.0f`. Of course, the exact speed and angle needed to achieve that with just 1 movement can be calculated with some trigonometry, but it's easier to to use the split positioning for this:  
[code] [ins=404,17](0f, 2.0f); // angle=0 => right
 [ins=406,17](rad(90), 1.0f); // angle=rad(90) => down [/code]  
It's easier to understand just by looking at it than something like  
[code] [ins=404,17](rad(26.56505f), 2.236067f); [/code],  
isn't it? It's the exact same movement, by the way.

### Movement limits
Sometimes, we don't really want the enemy to move outside of some area, which especially becomes a concern when the movement has randomness in it. Fortunately, ECL has a built-in way of dealing with this problem - the [ins=504,17] instruction, which makes it possible to keep the enemy in a rectangle (refer to the instruction description for details). The movement limit does not affect the absolute or relative positions individually - instead, it applies to the final position. It achieves that by making sure that `rel_pos + abs_pos` is never outside the movement limit. What it basically does is, every time absolute/relative position is modified, it checks whether the new final position is inside the limit and if it isn't, the absolute/relative position modification is either made smaller (so that the final position ends up right on the edge on the limit), or cancelled completely (if the final position is already on the edge of the limit). Because of that, removing the limit by using the [ins=505,17] instruction won't cause the enemy to suddenly warp to a parallel universe after building up the absolute/relative position for 12 hours, as building up positions is not possible with this implementation.
  
### "modes"
ECL has a whole bunch of movement instructions you can use - it has circle movements, ellipse movements, accelerated movements, etc.. We will use some of them in some of the next parts. But in order to understand how a big part of them works, we need to first talk about the so-called "modes".  
  
So, what the heck is a mode? Imagine changing a value from `0.0f` to `1.0f` over time - let's say it takes `t` frames for the change to complete. The value can change linearly (so that after `t/5` frames have passed value will be `0.2f`, after `t/2` it will be `0.5f` etc.), we could also make the value change speed increase every frame (accelerated change), or decrease every frame (decelerated change), or we could even do some funny stuff like making the value decrease first and then increase. How the value changes over time is what "mode" defines - most commonly used modes are for linear change, acceleration, deceleration or smooth change (start slow, increase change speed, then decrease change speed again at the end). There is actually a whole lot of modes (32!), but only 4 are used most of time.  
  
Mode is defined by a number. Most important modes are:
- `0` - linear
- `1` - accelerated
- `4` - decelerated
- `9` - smooth

A complete list of modes can be found on [ExpHP's site](https://exphp.github.io/thpages/#/anm/interpolation).
  
### All the numbers...
By now, the numbers needed to memorize have piled up, haven't they? All the aim modes, change modes, bullet sprites, enemy sprites... Fortunately, you don't actually have to remember them all! The [MERLIN](https://github.com/Priw8/merlin/) library defines a huge amount of things as text constants! We will learn how to use it in practice soon enough, but first we need to talk about some things that MERLIN uses in order to understand how it actually works.

[/requireEclmap]
