[title=Bullet managers, shooting danmaku]
[requireEclmap=17]

## Bullet managers
Now that we have spawned our beautiful fairy, we should give a meaning to its existence by making it shot some bullets! However, shooting bullets in ECL is a bit more involved that just calling 1 instruction, but in the end that makes it easier to manage. Every enemy comes with a set of 16 bullet managers, with IDs from 0 to 15. Using IDs other than these can cause unpredictable issues, such as making your fridge explode. A bullet manager (also etMgr for short) has the following properties (among many others, but these are most important):
- bullet sprite and color
- bullet angle
- bullet aim mode (more on that later)
- bullet speed
- bullet amount
- \.\.\.and a lot more

A really nice things about bullet managers is that they allow easily defining some simple bullet formations, such as rings or fans. But first, we should focus on shooting a single bullet. etMgr can be initialized by using the [ins=600,13] instruction.  
[code]anim {
    "enemy.anm";
}

void main() {
    [ins=502,17](32);
    [ins=23,17](60);
    [ins=300,17]("MyEnemy", 0f, 128f, 1000, 100, 0);
    [ins=23,17](10000);
}

void MyEnemy() {
    [ins=302,17](2);
    [ins=306,17](0, 0);
    [ins=600,17](0); // initialize etMgr on slot 0
    [ins=602,17](0, 6, 1); // in etMgr on slot 0, set bullet sprite and color: 6 -> outline bullet, 1 -> red  
    [ins=601,17](0); // shoot the bullet from etMgr on slot 0 - properties other than the sprite and color are default  
    [ins=23,17](10000);
}
[/code]  
After running the code above ingame, our fairy will shoot a single red bullet right as it spawns. Said bullet will actually be aimed at the player, since that's the default. Now, we shall discuss how bullet managers can be used to shoot multiple bullets at once.  
  
As you probably noticed, bullet sprite and color are defined with just numbers. You can refer to [this image](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/395767870119870466/570658618316161041/BULLET_IDS.png) by Dai for all bullet numbers (only valid for [game=15]LoLK[/game] onward). In the future, usage of the MERLIN library, which defines the bullet sprites and colors as text, will be explained.

## Bullet counts, aim modes
As mentioned earlier, bullet managers actually allow creating simple patterns, that can then be fired by using just one [ins=601,17] instruction. There are 4 main instructions that define a bullet manager pattern: [ins=604,17], [ins=605,17], [ins=606,17] and [ins=607,17]:
- [ins=607,17] sets the aim mode, which determines how the other properties will actually be interpreted.
- [ins=606,17] sets the `cnt1` and `cnt2` properties of the bullet manager. How it's interpreted exactly depends on the aim mode, but in general the pattern fired by the manager will have `cnt1*cnt2` bullets.
- [ins=605,17] sets the `spd1` and `spd2` properties of the manager. In general `spd1` should be higher than `spd2` and the bullets will move with speeds ranging from `spd2` to `spd1`, but again, how it's interpreted exactly depends on the aim mode.
- [ins=604,17] sets the `ang1` and `ang2` properties of the manager. In general, `ang1` offsets the pattern angle from the one defined by the aim mode, while `ang2` is related to the difference between angles of individual bullets in the pattern.

With this in mind, we can now discuss how individual aim modes work.
### Modes 0 and 1 - the "fan" modes
#### Aim mode 0
These modes shot a pattern that looks like a fan. What I mean is something like this:  
[img=content/ecl-tutorial/files/4/fan.png]  
The following properties were given to the bullet manager to shoot the pattern above:  
[code][ins=607,17](0, 0);
[ins=606,17](0, 6, 3);
[ins=605,17](0, 3f, 2f);
[ins=604,17](0, 0f, rad(10));[/code]  
- first, we have the [ins=607,17] instruction, that sets the aim mode to 0. Technically it's not needed, since 0 is the default.
- right after it, [ins=606,17] sets the bullet counts. As you can see on the image, this makes for `cnt1` (6) bullets shot in `cnt2` (3) layers. Do note that they were all shot from the same point, and their difference in position is only a result of different angles and speeds.
- [ins=605,17] sets the maximum speed, `spd1`, and minimum speed, `spd2`. The bullets in the first layer move with `spd1` speed, while bullets in the last layer move with `spd2` speed, and anything inbetween moves with speed between `spd1` and `spd2`.  
**Note:** the formula used to calculate the speed was different in earlier games, which resulted in bullets never actually moving with `spd2` speed. In all games from [game=125]DS[/game] onwards, however, the last layer does move with `spd2` speed.
- [ins=604,17] sets angle of the entire pattern `ang1` (in case of aim 0, this is relative to angle to player) and the angle difference between individual bullets in a layer `ang2`. Both these values are in radians, so if you want to use the more human-readable degrees you have to use the `rad` syntax, as illustrated by the value of `ang2`. Since `ang1` is 0, the pattern is aimed directly at the player - however, since the amount of bullets in a single layer (`cnt1`) is even, the actual bullets will all be aimed *around* the player, in order to keep symmetry. If `ang1` was a positive value, the pattern angle would be rotated clockwise, while negative values would result in a counterclockwise rotation.  
  
#### Aim mode 1
Aim mode 1 is very similar to aim mode 0, almost identical in fact. The only difference is that it's not aimed at the player, so the value given in `ang1` represents the absolute bullet angle. This means that the angles work as follow:
- `rad(0)` - straight right,
- `rad(90)` - straight down,
- `rad(180)` - straight left,
- `rad(270)`, or `rad(-90)` - straight up.
  
So if we were to modify the properties from earlier to use aim mode 1:  
[code][ins=607,17](0, 1);
[ins=606,17](0, 6, 3);
[ins=605,17](0, 3f, 2f);
[ins=604,17](0, 0f, rad(10));[/code]  
The fairy would shoot the bullets straight right instead of straight at the player.

### Aim modes 2, 3, 4 and 5 - the ring modes
#### Aim mode 2
As you can most likely deduce from the title of this section, these aim modes are designed to shoot rings. However, as I'll demonstrate, they can also be used to create some cool-looking bullet formations that aren't quite rings at all. But before that, let's actually shoot a ring by using aim mode 2.  
[code]void main() {
    [ins=502,17](32);
    [ins=23,17](60);
    [ins=300,17]("MyEnemy", 0f, 128f, 1000, 100, 0);
    [ins=23,17](10000);
}

void MyEnemy() {
    [ins=302,17](2);
    [ins=306,17](0, 2);
    [ins=600,17](0); // initialize etMgr on slot 0
    [ins=607,17](0, 2); // use aim mode 2 for etMgr on slot 0
    [ins=602,17](0, 6, 1); // in etMgr on slot 0, set bullet sprite and color: 6 -> outline bullet, 1 -> red  
    [ins=606,17](0, 20, 1); // set cnt1 to 20 and cnt2 to 1
    [ins=601,17](0); // shoot the bullet from etMgr on slot 0
    [ins=23,17](10000);
}[/code]  
What this code results in is this:  
[img=content/ecl-tutorial/files/4/ring.png]  
This is a ring of `cnt1` bullets, which in this case is 20. It's also aimed at the player, since aim mode 2 aims at the player like aim mode 0. However, in this case, the amount of bullets doesn't matter, and one of them will always be aimed at the player. Notice how we didn't need to set `ang2` to define the distance between individual bullets here - in ring aim modes, this is calculated automatically. You might be curious what `ang2` does, then. We can check it by using these properties:  
[code][ins=606,17](0, 5, 3); // 3 layers of 5 bullets
[ins=605,17](0, 3f, 2f); // spd1, spd2
[ins=604,17](0, 0f, rad(10)); // ang2 = rad(10) [/code]  
[img=content/ecl-tutorial/files/4/ring2.png]  
\.\.\.eh? What the heck? That's not a ring at all! Or is it? Let's examine this pattern closely. We know that there should be 3 layers here... Let's look at each of them individually:  
[img=content/ecl-tutorial/files/4/ring2b.png]  
The 5 highlighted bullets are the first layer. And sure enough, they are indeed a ring (as much as you can call 5 bullets like that). We can look at the second layer in a similar way - 5 bullets forming a ring, but this is where `ang2` affects stuff: the entire ring gets rotated by `ang2`, relative to the layer before it. This also happens to the third layer. So, while this formation sure doesn't look like it, it actually consists of just 3 low-density rings. This is what I meant earlier when I said that ring aim modes can be used to create bullet formations that aren't seen as rings at all.

[/requireEclmap]
