[title=ECL - variables]
[requireEclmap=17]

## ECL - variables

In programming, variables are basically containers that can store some value. You can think of a variable as of a box with a name on it, and you can put exactly 1 value in that box through a *variable assignment* operation, which replaces whatever was in the box earlier. You can also check what's inside your box, which means *reading the variable value*. In short, there are 2 basic operations you can perform:
- setting the variable: "I'd like to put value 8 in the box named MyBox"
- reading the variable: "I'd like to know what value the box named MyBox contains"

\.\.\.though, let's stop calling variables boxes now.  
  
ECL contains 3 types of variables: subroutine variables, which are only accesible in the scope that created them, local variables, which can only be accessed by the enemy that owns them, and global variables, that can be accessed by anything, anytime. A variable in ECL can also only contain 1 of 2 possible value types - an integer or a float. There are no string variables, or any structures such as arrays.

### Subroutine variables
Subroutine variables are the only variable type you can actually create, as local and global variables are hardcoded. You declare them with either the `int` or `float` keyword followed by the variable name. Variable names must follow the same rules as sub names, and you also cannot create 2 variables of the same name in the exactly the same scope. What are scopes exactly? Basically, a scope is created anytime there is a block of code contained within curly brackets `{}`. As of now, the only scope we know is the main scope of the sub, but new scopes can be created by conditional statements and loops, both of which will be discussed in the future. Anyway, have a look at this code, that defines the variable `sanae`:  
[code] void main() {
	int sanae;
	[ins=502,17](32);
	[ins=23,17](120);
 }[/code]  
[br][br]
After declaring the variable, we can now use it:  
[code] int sanae;
 sanae = 10; // set the "sanae" variable to 10
 [ins=23,17](sanae); // wait for the amount of frames specified by the variable - in this case, 10[/code]  
[br][br]
It is also possible to set the variable when declaring it:  
[code] int sanae = 20;
 [ins=23,17](sanae); // waits 20 frames[/code]  
[br][br]
Or even declare multiple variables at once:  
[code] int sanae = 20, kanako = 30, suwako;
 [ins=23,17](suwako); // wait for... uh, what? [/code]  
As you can see, the code above has an error - the variable `suwako` is accessed before being assigned a value. For how many frames is the sub going to wait, then? Well, I have no idea! And you have no way to know that either. It's *usually* 0, but not always. It could be anything, really. Since this behaviour is undefined, it can often cause replays to desync. In short: **always assign a value to a variable before accessing it.**  
[br][br]
Float variables are declared like so:  
[code] float reimu = 5.2f;
 [ins=605,17](0, reimu, reimu);[/code]  
[br][br]
You can also declare multiple float variables at once, similarly to how you can declare multiple integers.  
[code] float reimu = 5.2f, notReimu = 4.2f;
 reimu = notReimu; // value of reimu is now 4.2f
 notReimu = rad(180); // value of notReimu is not 3.14159...f, reimu is still 4.2f[/code]  
[br][br]
Now... what happens if we do this?  
[code] int sanae = 5.2f; // ???[/code]  
This behaviour is actually well-defined and the given float will be rounded down, resulting in `sanae` being set to 5. Though arguably, thecl should show at least a warning when doing such things, as there are no other cases where implict casting (automatically converting value of 1 type to another) is allowed.  
So what you should do instead is do the typecast explicitly:  
[code] int sanae = _S(5.2f);[/code]  
While this code does exactly the same thing as the one earlier, it makes it clear that the cast is intentional and the variable wasn't declared as `int` instead of `float` accidentaly. `_S(value)` is used to cast a value to an integer (`S` stands for Signed integer), and `_f(value)` is used to cast a value to a float (`f` for float) (as a small note, it's possible that this syntax will be changed in the future, as it's quite wonky now). We will talk about typecasts a bit more in the next part.

### Sub arguments
So far, every time we called a sub, we used empty brackets to indicate that the parameter list is empty, like so: `bar();`. However, subs can take parameters just like instructions, as long as they are defined in the sub declaration:  
[code] void bar(int a, float b) {
	 [ins=23,17](a);
	 [ins=400,17](b, 128.0f);
 }
 
 void main() {
	 [ins=502,17](32);
	 bar(5, 80.0f);
 }[/code]  
 If the sub was called with a wrong amount of parameters or wrong parameter types, thecl would show a warning (though the code would compile correctly). The parameters are actually nothing more than regular sub variables that simply get initialized with a value given in the call parameters. However, sub argument declarations are slightly different than regular variable declarations in terms of syntax:
 - `void bar()` - valid
 - `void bar(int a)` - valid
 - `void bar(int a, b)` - [c=red]NOT[/c] valid, it has to be `void bar(int a, int b)` instead!
  

### Local variables
When an enemy is created, it gets a nice set of local variables it can use. These variables will be shared across all subs it runs. You can not create new local variables - you only have the ones given by the game. The general-purpose variables for storing whatever values you want are:
- [var=-9985,17] to [var=-9982,17] for integers,
- [var=-9981,17] to [var=-9978,17] and [var=-9935,17] to [var=-9932,17] for floats.  

Like with instructions, you can hover your mouse over variable names to see what these variables are. The reason why the float variables were split into 2 groups like this is because it's not known whether the latter half (4-7) functions *exactly* the same as 0-3. Anyway, as you can also see from the descriptions, most or all of these variables are "inherited" by spawned enemies. What does that actually mean? Have a look at this code:  
[code] void main() {
	 [ins=502,17](32)
	 [var=-9985,17] = 30;
	 [ins=300,17]("MyEnemy", 0f, 128f, 100, 100, 0);
	 [ins=23,17](10000);
 }
 
 void MyEnemy() {
	 [ins=23,17](I0);
 }[/code]  
For how many frames is `MyEnemy` going to wait? Because the value of `I0` got *inherited*, it's going to wait for 30 frames. Using variable inheritance is a common way of passing arguments to spawned enemies. Keep in mind however, that just the value is inherited, not the variable itself. This means that if you set [var=-9985,17] to 30, spawn an enemy, and then set the variable to 50, it will still be 30 for the spawned enemy.  
   
There are also many other local variables, but they are *read-only* - you can't change their value directly, only read it. Attempting to write to a read-only variable will result in the game crashing. Some examples of read-only variables are [var=-9988,17] or [var=-9954,17].  
  
### Global variables

Global variables are variables that get created when a stage starts. Similarly to local variables, new global variables can't be added. The main purpose of global variables is primitive enemy communication and long-term storage of important values. These concepts will be discussed more in-depth when we get to enemy communication and interaction. The general-purpose global variables are [var=-9926,17] to [var=-9923,17] for integers and [var=-9922,17] to [var=-9915,17] for floats.  
  
There are also some more interesting global variables that let you check various things about the current game state - for example:
- [var=-9986,17] - used to check whether the most recent spell was timed out or not,
- [var=-9945,17] - used to check what shottype the player is using,
- [var=-10000,17] - used to get a random number between 0 and 2 147 483 647,
- [var=-9998,17] - used to get a random angle.  

Keep in mind that the "random" variables are affected by the same RNG jank as aim modes 6-8 mentioned earlier, though it generally shouldn't matter.  
  
For a mostly-complete list of local and global variables, you can check the [variable table](#s=modding/vars).
  


[/requireEclmap]