[title=Expressions, return types]

[requireEclmap=17]

## Expressions, return types
What is an *expression*? Simply put, it's anything that can be read as a value, but actually consists of one or more values combined by using *operators*. For examplee, you can add two numbers by using the addition operator `+`:  
[code] int expr = 2 + 2; // set expr to 4 [/code]  
As mentioned, expressions can consist of more than just two values:  
[code] int expr = 2 + 2 * 2; // set expr to 6 [/code]  
However, you have to keep something called *operator precedence* in mind. Basically, the multiplication operation is performed before the addition here.  
Here is a complete list of operators in thecl, together with their precedence:  
[code] int expr;
 // precedence 13
 expr = a ? b : c; // results in b if a is not 0, otherwise c
 // precedence 12
 expr = a || b; // logical or, results in 1 is either a or b is not 0, otherwise 0
 // precedence 11
 expr = a && b; // logical and, results in 1 only if a and b are not 0, otherwise 0
 // the following 3 are bitwise operators, you can read how they work on wikipedia:
 // https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitwise_operation
 // precedence 10
 expr = a | b; // bitwise OR
 // precedence 9
 expr = a ^ b; // bitwise XOR
 // precedence 8
 expr = a & b; // bitwise AND
 // precedence 7
 expr = a == b; // equality comparison, results in 1 if a and b have the same values, otherwise 0
 expr = a != b; // inequality comparison, results in 1 if a and b have different values, otherwise 0
 // precedence 6
 expr = a < b; // less than comparison, results in 1 if a is less than b, otherwise 0
 expr = a > b; // greater than comparison, results in 1 if a is greater than b, otherwise 0
 expr = a <= b; // less or equal comparison, results in 1 if a is less or equal b, otherwise 0
 expr = a >= b; // greater ir equak comparison, results in 1 if a is greater or equal b, otherwise 0
 // precedence 5
 expr = a + b; // addition
 expr = a - b; // subtraction
 // precedence 4
 expr = a * b; // a times b
 expr = a / b; // a divided by b
 expr = a % b; // a modulo b - modulo means the remainder of integer division, so 3 % 2 results in 1
 // precedence 3
 expr = ~a; // bitwise NOT
 expr = -a; // negate a, so if a was 1, -a is -1
 // precedence 2
 expr = sin(a); // trigonometric sin function
 expr = cos(a); // trigonometric cos function
 expr = sqrt(a); // square root of a
 // subroutine calls also have precedence 2, we will talk about them later in this part
 // precedence 1
 expr = a--; // expr is set to a, and then the value of a is decremented by 1
 a--; // do NOT do this unless you know what you're doing!! It does more than decrementing the variable
      // we will talk about it in the next part[/code]  
Lower precedence means that the operator is evaluated first. You can think of it as of a position in a queue. Let's look at the example from before again:  
[code] int expr = 2 + 2 * 2; [/code]  
Since addition has precedence 5 and multiplication has precedence 4, multiplication gets evaluated first. After that, our expression becomes `2 + 4`, which then gets evaluated into `6`. Let's have a look at a more complex example:  
[code] int expr = 4 % 2 || 2 + 5 && 6 < 9; [/code]  
The evaluation of this expressions goes like this:
1. `4 % 2 || 2 + 5 && 6 < 9` (initial)
2. `0 || 2 + 5 && 6 < 9` (evaluated modulo)
3. `0 || 7 && 6 < 9` (evaluated addition)
4. `0 || 7 && 1` (evaluated "less than" comparison)
5. `0 || 1` (evaluated logical and)
6. `1` (evaluated bitwise or)  
  
  
Operator precedence is cool and all, but sometimes it's not neccesairly doing the thing we want. Fortunately, we can use brackets to enforce the order we want:  
[code] int expr = (2 + 2) * 2; // 8 [/code]  
In this case, the addition is in brackets and as such gets evaluated first. Sometimes, you may want to use brackets even if they don't change anything, in order to improve code readability.  

### The current jank & inconsistent whitespace requirements
As of now, thecl is a bit janky with handling the `+` and `-` operators: basically, `2-2` or `2+2` will NOT work properly. You will get some syntax error message. Instead, you have to write `2 - 2` and `2 + 2`. This is not the case for any other operator, `2*2` works perfectly fine. This behaviour is quite janky and will most likely be removed in the future, resulting in `2+2` being the same as `2 + 2`.

### Value and variable types in expressions
What would happen if we were to add an integer to a float?  
[code] int expr = 2 + 2.0f; // ??? [/code]  
`thecl.exe:expr.tecl:2,24: no expression found for type(s): S and f`  
Quite a cryptic error message, but all it means is that the the operator didn't get the types it expected - addition expects either 2 integers or 2 floats, not something inbetween (fun fact - earlier versions of thecl would actually crash in this case, instead of giving an error). You might recall typecasts being mentioned in the previous part - this is how this should be handled:  
[code] int expr = 2 + _S(2.0f); // works [/code]  
  
Typacasts also have the same effect as brackets when it comes to precedence:  
[code] int expr = _S(2.0f + 2.0f) * 2; // 8 [/code]  
  
And that's about it for expressions, although... there is actually 1 more. But since it's very closely related to difficulty labels, we will talk about it when we get to that.

### Subroutine return values
Up until now, all subroutines we defined were using the `void` keyword. This is how you define a sub that does not return anything. If you want a sub to return something, you defined it with either `int` or `float` keywords. But... what does *returning* a value actually do? Basically, it means that some kind of output is generated by the sub.  
[code] int sum(int a, int b) {
     return a + b;
 }

 void main() {
     [ins=502,17](32);
     int test = sum(2, 5); // 7
 }[/code]  
By defining the `sum` sub with the `int` keyword, we indicate that the value type it's going to return is integer. The sub then uses the `return` keyword to generate the output - sum of the arguments it got. Obviously, such sub is rather useless since it's better to just use addition, but we can make something more useful:  
[code] float tan(float a) {
     return sin(a) / cos(a);
 }[/code]  
Obviosly, we probably *shouldn't* call this with a value that will result in `cos(a)` being 0.  
   
There is 1 crucial thing about using sub return values - the sub we want to read the return value from **MUST** be declared earlier in the code. This is because thecl needs to know the return type of the called sub in order to compile expressions correctly.  
[code] void main() {
     [ins=502,17](32);
     int test = sum(2, 5); // are we getting a float or an int out of this call?
 }
 
 int sum(int a, int b) {
     // well, now we know, but it's a little bit late.
     return a + b;
 }[/code]  
The above code will result in thecl throwing some error at us.  
`thecl.exe:expr.tecl:3,25: sub must be declared before being used in an expression: sum`  
  
Every sub we created so far was *declared* and *defined* at the same time. Declaration is what contains the return type, name and argument list of a sub, while definition is what contains the code. However, it's actually possible to declare a sub without defining it at the same time, like so:  
[code] int sum(int a, int b); // forward declaration of sub sum

 void main() {
     [ins=502,17](32);
     int test = sum(2, 5); // are we getting a float or an int out of this call?
 }
 
 int sum(int a, int b) { // definiton of sub sum
     // well, now we know, but it's a little bit late.
     return a + b;
 }[/code]  
This code works fine, because thecl now knows what the return type of the sub is before calling it. Forward declarations are especially useful when working on code that's split between multiple ECL files, which we will talk about in the future.  

#### How return values actually work and the consequences
ECL, in its bytecode compiled form, has no specific way of making subs return values. So what thecl does to allow subs to return values is it utilizes the [var=-9982,17] and [var=-9978,17] variables as temporary return registers. Basically, when you do `return 2;`, you set [var=-9982,17] to 2, and then actually return from the sub (for floats, [var=-9978,17] is used instead). Then, the value in the variable that was set is used in as the return value. This is why thecl needs to know the return type of a sub beforehand - it has to know which variable it should use. So generally, in order to be safe, if you're using return values you should refrain from using the 2 variables mentioned entirely.

### Where the heck can expressions be used?
- in variable assignments: `int a = 2 + 2;`
- as parameters: `bar(2 + 2);`, `bar(sum(2, 2));`
- in other expressions: `bar(sum(2, 2 + 10));`
- [c=red]NOT[/c] in the `rad` pseudofunction, it only accepts raw float values.

[/requireEclmap]