[title=ECL - the stack]

[requireEclmap=17]

## ECL - the stack
In order to understand some things about ECL, it's important to know how the stack system it uses works, at least a bit. While it's technically it's something that should be fully handled by the compiler, and for writing fully custom ECL code it actually is, but it's something you have to understand in order to read decompiled code in some cases.
  
### What is a stack?
(if you know what a stack is, you can skip this, unsuprisingly. Wow!)  
I encourage you to watch the [The Stack: Last in, First out](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IWQ74f2ot7E) video by [Retro Game Mechanics Explained](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwRqWnW5ZkVaP_lZF7caZ-g). I think it explains what a stack is really well, and although it goes into some details that aren't really all that useful for ECL things, it's still a good thing to watch.  
  
Stack is most commonly explained through some kind of analogy. Imagine a bunch of books books lying on the table. You can perform 2 basic operation - adding another book on top of the ones that are already there, or removing one book from the top. These 2 operations are called `push` and `pop` respectively. Pushing makes the stack of books larger, which means that the size of the stack increases, meanwhile popping decreases the stack. Since you can only remove the most recently added book, this is often referred to as "last in, first out" or LIFO for short. Popping also returns a value - after all, once you grab the book from the top, you're now holding it, so you got something by popping.  

We've actually been using the ECL stack all the time - just not explicitly. All expressions, or even simple variable assignments use the stack.  
Here is an example of what `a = 2;` actually gets compiled into:  
[code][ins=42,17](2);
[ins=43,17](a); [/code]  
It's rather simple - first, 2 gets pushed to the stack, and then it gets popped into the variable `a` (in other words, the return value of the pop operation gets stored in `a`).  
Let's have a look at what happens in case of `a = 2 + 2;`:  
[code][ins=42,17](2);
[ins=42,17](2);
[ins=50,17]()
[ins=43,17](a);[/code]  
As you can see, both numbers get pushed to the stack, increasing the size by 2 in total, and then the [ins=50,17] instruction is called. What it does is it pops 2 numbers that were pushed to the stack and then pushes the sum of it. So after it, the stack size gets decreased by 1. With the [ins=43,17] instruction, the size of the stack returns to what it was originally and the result of addition gets stored in variable `a`.  
  
It is very, **very** important to make sure that the stack size is the same as it was at the beginning after doing some stack operations. Failing to do so will result in various issues basically anywhere, it's not even specific to ECL. In case of ECL, the game is very likely to end up crashing if you corrupt the stack by permanently changing its size.

### The thecl syntax for using the stack
The syntax for pushing is very unintuitive and looks like this:  
[code]2;[/code]  
...yeah. You just put whatever you want to push without assigning it to anything. You can also do `2 + 2;`, which will result in the sum of these numbers ending up on the stack. This syntax is actually sort related to how thecl handles expression decompilation internally, but I'm not going to go into details here. Either way, changing it would not be completely trivial.  
  
Now... remember how I said that you shouldn't do `a--;` without assigning it to anything or using it in some other expression? This is why. If you simply type `a--;` it will decrement the value but the pre-decrement value will also end up on the stack, which will cause issues if you don't remove it. Of course, if this is what you *want* to do, you can use it, but keep in mind how it actually works.  
  
If you want to use the value you pushed as a parameter for something, you can do it like this:  
[code]2;
[ins=23,17]([-1]);[/code]  
Keep in mind that (**in case of games starting from TD**) this does not actually pop from the stack directly. Every instruction has an internal property that tells the game by how much the stack size should be changed after executing the instruction, and thecl is nice enough to set it to a value such that the thing from the stack we used there gets "popped" after the instruction. Either way, as you can see, `[-1]` refers to the value we pushed earlier? But why is it `-1` exactly? It kind of has to do with how the ECL code functions internally, and it basically means the value on top of the stack. `[-2]` would actually refer to the value before the one on top of the stack, etc.. For example:  
[code]5;
0;
[ins=303,17]([-1], [-2]);[/code]  
You have to keep the stack layout in mind - `-1` doesn't refer to the value we pushed first, but to the value we pushed *last*. So in this case, `[-1]` is actually 0, not 5, which makes the first parameter 0 and the second parameter 5.  

#### Reading floats & how typecasts actually work
For floats, you want to use `[-1.0f]`, `[-2.0f]`, etc.. Though, you actually CAN push an integer and read it as a float through `[-1.0f]`, the game will cast it automatically (in fact, this is how typecasts in instruction call parameters work!). This is because the game actually remembers what type of value was pushed to the stack, and casts it if needed. It also applies to all stack operation-related instructions: if [ins=50,17] is called but the values pushed to the stack earlier are floats, the game casts them to integers and pushes the integer result.


### Rare cases where thecl gives up while decompiling (can't really blame it for that though!)
Sometimes, there's jank like:  
[code]    a;
1:
    6;
    [ins=51,17]();
    [ins=45,17](a);[/code]  
`1:` is a time label, more on that later, basically it makes the sub stop executing until at least a certain number of frames has passed since the sub was called, in this case `1` frame (the timer can be reset by some instructions). Basically a waiting instruction, but weird. Either way... in this case it's right in the middle of a stack operation, which is uhh... ??? (~~oi, janky compiler ZUN~~). I mean, you'd expect it to be after or before it, not in the middle. Without that time label, thecl would output this as `a = a + 6.0f`. During your ZUN-code exploring adventures you might encounter things like that sometimes, but with the knowledge you have now you should be able to kinda guess what it's supposed to be. Either way, understanding decompiled ECL is something that will be discussed in the second chapter of this tutorial.

With the stack in mind, we can now **finally** move on to conditional statements!

[/requireEclmap]