[title=ECL - conditional statements]

[requireEclmap=17]

## ECL - conditional statements
A conditional statement is something that allows the same piece of code do different things based on some conditions. The simpliest example of that would be setting different amounts of bullets an enemy shoots based on the difficulty. thecl offers a variety of ways to check conditions, and we will go over all of them here.  

### The ternary operator
In the part about expressions, the `a ? b : c` syntax was mentioned - this is the *ternary* operator and it's a very basic way of selecting between 2 different values based on some other value. It is useful when combined with some comparison operators:  
[code] int a = [var=-9954,17] > 200 ? 10 : 20;[/code]  
With this rather simple code, `a` gets set to 10 if life of the enemy is higher than 200, and to 20 if it isn't. There is actually one minor restriction in this syntax, we will talk about it later. While we could also use it to select values based on the difficulty, there is a better and simplier way...

### The difficulty flags
The difficulty flag is the simpliest way of making an ECL script do different things based on the difficulty. Here is a simple example:  
[code]!E
  30;
!N
  25;
!H 
  20;
!L
  15;
!*
  [ins=23,17]([-1]);[/code]  
`!E` is a difficulty label. It signalizes that the code below it should only execute if the difficulty is easy, until it hits another difficulty switch. Each difficulty has its own label: `!E`, `!N`, `!H` and `!L` for typical difficulties, and then also `!X` for extra, `!O` for overdrive ([game=8]IN[/game] actually also has similar flags for detecting focused/unfocused state, but that's unrelated).  The label at the end, `!*`, indicates that the code below should execute regardless of the difficulty, effectively ending the difficulty checking section. You must not forget to put that at the end of the switch, or the game could explode right in your face. The difficulty labels can be combined, for example `!EN` will mean that the diff has to be either easy or normal mode. The example above makes the game push a number to the stack based on the difficulty, and then use that number in the [ins=23,17] instruction.  

#### Single-instruction difficulty label
Since thecl version 12, there is another version of difficulty labels that only makes them affect the instruction right after them. For example:  
[code]!E:   [ins=23,17](10);
!NHL: [ins=23,17](50);[/code]  
What makes the label only affect one instruction is the colon `:` character.  After the instruction affected by such label, the difficulty gets set to `*`, **and not to what it was before the single instruction label.**

  
### The difficulty switch
ZUN actually doesn't write difficulty checks like that - as shown on a screenshot from an interview, he has a special syntax for it. What ZUN writes is:  
[code][ins=23,17](30:25:20:15);[/code]  
And thecl actually allows that too! This is called a *difficulty switch*, and it's the expression I didn't talk about during the part about expressions.  
[code]  [ins=23,17](1:2:3:4);
 /* this does the same thing as the one above, except it takes way more space */
!E
  1;
!N
  2;
!H
  3;
!LO
  4;
!*
  [ins=23,17]([-1]);

  /* but what if we wanted to make overdrive separate? */
  [ins=23,17](1:2:3:4:5); /* ...just like that. */
  [ins=23,17](1:2); /* on the other hand this means 1 on easy and 2 on all other difficulties */
  [ins=23,17](1:2:3); /* E=1, N=2, HLO=3, you get the idea. */[/code]  
A difficulty switch can be put in the same places as all other expressions.  
...however, you may notice some syntax ambiguity here: How does `1:2*2:5` get interpreted? Is it `1:(2*2):5` or `(1:2)*(2:5)`? Well, it's the latter. The difficulty switch expression has the lowest precedence, and as such is first in the queue when thecl evaluates and compiles the expression (though obviously brackets are still evaluated earlier). So basically, when you want to put an expression inside of a difficulty switch, you always have to use brackets.

### The if / if-else statements
If statements are the most general-purpose way of checking conditions. The general syntax is:  
[code] if (expr) {
     instructions
 }[/code]  
This executes the code in curly brackets only when expr is a non-zero value.  
Remember the [var=-10000,17] variable from earlier? We can use it for some simple stuff:  
[code] // by doing RAND % x, we get a random value between 0 and x-1
 if ([var=-10000,17] % 2) { // so this has 50% of being 1 and 50% of being 0
     [ins=23,17](40);
 }[/code]  
  
If statements get obviously more complex than that. Remember operators such as `&&` (logical and) or `||` (logical or)? They can effectively be used to chain multiple conditions together. For example:  
[code] if ([var=-9954,17] < 2000 || [var=-9988,17] > 30*60) {
     phase2(); // begin second phase of the attack
 }[/code]  
This will call `phase2` sub once the HP is either below 2000 or 30 seconds have passed since the [var=-9988,17] variable was last reset (there is an instruction that can do that).  
  
Instead of using a code block, you can also simply put an instruction, like so:  
[code] if (expr) 
     [ins=23,17](10); // only executed if condition is true
 [ins=23,17](20); // always executes[/code]  
Keep in mind however, that this is ECL and not Python, so indentation is not what defines what is a part of the `if` and what isn't. The curly bracket-less if statement will always only affect 1 instruction right after it.
  
#### If-else statements
Sometimes, we want to do something if a condition is true, and something else if it isn't. This is where we can use if-else statements:  
[code] if (expr) {
     // instructions when condition is met
 } else {
     // instructions when condition is not met
 }[/code]  
  
If-else statements can also be chained together, like this:  
(note: in the examples below, `...` represents any code)  
[code] if (case1) {
   // if case1 condition was met
   ...
 } else if (case2) {
   // if case1 wasn't met but case2 was
   ...
 } else if (case3) {
   // if case1 and case2 weren't met, but case3 was
   ...
 } else { 
   // if none of the conditions earlier were met  
   ...
 }[/code]  

However, in some *cases* there is a more efficient way of checking multiple conditions... 
### The switch statement
It's the cooler if-else chain (sort of):  
[code] switch(expr) {
   case 0:
     ...
     break;
   case 1:
     ...
     break;
   case 2:
   case 3:
     ...
     break;
   case 4:
     ...
   case 5:
     ...
 }[/code]  
What this does is it compares the result of `expr` to the values given in cases in the order they appear in the code.  If the output of `expr` is, 0 code execution jumps to `case 0:`, and no other cases are checked. If it's 1, execution jumps to `case 1:` etc. All code below the case execution jumped to will be executed until it hits a `break;` statement, which makes the execution jump to the end of the switch statement. As shown in the example, cases can be combined (like with `case 2:` and `case 3:` being next to each other). Cases `4` and `5` are combined in a slightly different way than `2` and `3` - `case 4` executes some code specific to itself and then executes the code of `case 5`, while `case 5` only executes its own code.  
  
A `default` case can also be used:  
[code] switch(expr) {
   case 0:
     ...
     break;
   case 1:
     ...
     break;
   default:
     ...
}[/code]  
The `default` case works as any other case when it comes to checking order, except `default` accepts any result of `expr`. In this particular example, `case 0:` executes if the result of `expr` is 0, `case 1:` if it's 1, and if neither of these cases are met, `default` executes. However, since `default` is still being "checked" in order, `case 1:` will never execute in the following code:  
[code] switch(expr) {
   case 0:
     ...
     break;
   default:
     ...
     break;
   case 1:
     ...
}[/code]  
The reason why `case 1:` never gets executed is that the game comes across the `default` case first and executes its code. This behaviour is something that's possibly different in other programming languages, so keep that in mind.  
  
The ECL switch statements can also be used with float values, like `case 1.0f:`. In fact, you can even put expressions there, **however** if you put expressions they must be in brackets. This is because the `case expr:` syntax uses a colon, and the difficulty switch expression also uses a colon, which would lead to the colon of the `case` being misinterpreted as a part of a difficulty switch if it wasn't for the requirement of brackets for expressions. The same issue occurs with the ternary operator, as it also uses `:`. This colon makes it so the value in the middle (given `a ? b :c` it would be `b`) must be in a bracket if it's an expression. This is the minor restriction I was talking about.  

### Variable scoping
As you may recall, it was mentioned earlier that blocks of code contained within curly brackets `{}` create a new scope for variables.  
[code] void someSub() {
     // main scope of the sub
     if (cond) {
         // scope of the if statement #1, which is
         // still a part of the main scope
     }
     if (cond) {
         // scope of the if statement #2, which is
         // still a part of the main scope,
         // but independent from the if statement #1
     }
 }
[/code]  
If we were to put another `if` statement (or anything else that wraps code in blocks), another scope would get created. Anyway? How do scopes affect subroutine variables? Basically, a sub variable can only be accessed in the scope it was created in. This means that if we created a variable in the scope of `if statement #1`, it would only be accessible there. But if we were to create a variable in the main scope, it would still be accessible in both `if` scopes, as they are still a part of the main scope.  
[code] void someSub() {
     int a = 30;
     if (cond) {
          int b = 20;
          [ins=23,17](a); // works
     }
     [ins=23,17](b); // error: variable 'b' not found
 } [/code]
  
By using scopes, we can also *shadow* variables. It means that if we create a variable in an inner scope that has the same name as a variable in the outer scope, attempting to use the variable of that name in the inner scope will always result in using the inner variable, effectively making the outer one inaccessible in the inner scope.  
[code] void someSub() {
     int a = 20;
     if ([var=-10000,17] % 2) {
         int a = 30; // creates new variable in this scope
         [ins=23,17](a); // wait 30 frames
     }
     // now the variable created in if scope is no longer
     // shadowing the variable from global scope
     [ins=23,17](a); // waits 20 frames
 } [/code]  
  
Anyway, condition checking is cool and all, but do you know what's even cooler? Loops! And this is what we will talk about next.

[/requireEclmap]
